Hello Friends
In this video let us have an introduction to quick
sort algorithm
so quick sort
is a divide and conquer algorithm it divides
a large array into smaller sub arrays
And then it will Recursively sort the sub
arrays There are three major task in quick sort algorithm
First is pivot elements selection then the partition function
and finally applying the above process
recursively to all the sub arrays
Let us understand it
Using this example let us take an array of five
elements 10 25 3 50 and 20
We need to sort this array using the quick sort
algorithm
So the first step is to pick the Pivot
element from this array
There are many ways in which we can choose the
pivot element
It could be the first element of array or the
last element of the array or the middle element of the array
Or we can also pick any element randomly here we
are going to pick the last element as the pivot
element
So our pivot element
Here is 20
So first task is done
We chose the pivot element
It is 20 The next task is to partition the array
that is we will rearrange all the array elements in
such a way that all values lesser than the Pivot
should come before the pivot and all values
greater than the pivot should come after it
Those elements can be in any order
At the end of the partition function the pivot element
will be placed at it
Sorted position
Let us apply the partition logic
It is very simple
Let us take two variables the partition variable p index
and iterating variable i initialised both of them to the
starting of array here starting index zero
So initialised P Index and I to 0 now check
If a r r of I is less than the
pivot that is if 10 is less than 20 and
if it is true we have to swap elements that
I and P index both I and p index points
the same element so 10 will be swapped to its
actual place
It will not make any changes in the array
After this swap we need to increments value of P
index
So move of P index to next position now do the
same process with the next element
So increment I now compare 25 less than 20
The condition is false
So no need of swap
If there is no swap we should not increment
the value of P index
So there is no change in P index
Just continue the same process with the next element
So again increment i now compare three
And pivot element which is 20 and three is
less than 20
So the condition is true
So swap arr of I and arr of P index
and then increment p index
And please note that whenever the condition is satisfied we
are performing the swap operation and we are implementing P
index
If the condition is false we are just implementing
I now do the same process with the next element
So increment I so now compare 50 and 20 and
the condition fails and the array is completed
Now now the P index points to the array index two
this is nothing but the position of the pivot
element 20
So finally we should swap arr of end an arr
of P index swap 25 20 here the element 20
inserted in It's sorted position
Now we can assure that all the elements before P
index is lesser than 20 and elements after P index
is greater than 20 which means the Element 20 is
sorted now
Now we need to recursively
sort all the elements before P index and
after p index so there will be two recursive calls
One is quick sort of arr comma start comma p
index minus one that is from the starting index to
p index minus one that is the elements before P
index
We will not include the P Index here because it
is already sorted
And next is quick sort of arr comma P index
plus one comma end that is from P index plus
one to end
That is the elements after P index here in this
array start is equal to zero end is equal to
four and p index is equal to two
Now after the partition logic the first recursive call
will be executed
Here start is equal to zero and end is equal
to P index minus one and p index value is
equal to 2 so two minus one equal to one
So end is equal to one and the next recursive
call will wait until the task
Of first recursive call is finished
So sub array from index 0 to 1 that is elements 10
and three will be taken in this sub array
The partition function will be executed first the same process
will be applied here
Also partition index P index and Iterating variable
I will point the starting index here starting index zero
So both P index and I will point the index
zero
The last element 3 will be taken as the pivot element
Now compare arr of I less than pivot element
that is compare
10 is less than three and it is not so
there will be no swap needed
Hence the index will point the same index
Now the array is completed
Finally we need to swap arr of P index and
arr of end
So swap 10 and three and since we're doing the
process in the original array it will be reflected in
the above array
Now arr of P index is sorted so arr
of 0 3 is sorted
Now here the P index value is equal to zero
So this function has two recursive calls now like before
That is from the starting index to p index minus
one and next is from p index plus one to
end
Like above the first recursive
call will be executed first and the second call
will wait until the task
Of first one is finished here
Starting index is equal to zero
End equal to p index minus one which is zero
minus one that is minus one
But this is an invalid index zero to minus one so
we can perform the quick sort task
Here
when the sub array has invalid index or only one element
We should stop the process
So we should add the condition if start is less
than and before doing the process
And this condition will stop the execution when this sub
array has an invalid index or only one element
So this recursive call will not be executed here
Now the first recursive call has finished its task
So now the second recursive call will be executed
Here start is equal to P index plus one which
is zero plus one equal to one and end is
equal to one
So in this sub array start and end
Both are equal to one
So there is only one element so we can stop
the process Now Here If start less than end condition
will be false
since start is equal to end so it will not
be executed Now this quick sort function has finished its
task
so Control will reach the main quick sort function here
The first recursive call has finished its task
So now the second recursive call starts its execution
So quick sort of arr comma p Index plus one
comma end will be executed now and here start is
equal to p index plus one and P index equal
two so start equal to two plus one That three
and end is equal to four and the last element
25 at index four will be taken as the pivot
element
Now compare arr of I less than pivot element
that is compare 50 is less than 25 but it
is not so there will be no swap needed
Hence P index will point the same index three
Now the array is completed
Finally we need to swap arr of p index and
arr of end So swap 50 and 25
Since we're doing the process in the original array it will
be reflected here
Also
Now arr of the index is sorted so arr
of 3 25 is sorted
Now here p index value equal to three
Now this function has two recursive calls like we had
in previous cases
That is from starting index to P index minus one
and next is from P index +1 to end
Like above the first recursive call will be executed
first and the second call will wait until the task
of first one is finished
So here starting index equal to three end equal to
P index minus one
That is three minus one which is two So when
we checked the condition
If start is less than end it will fail since
three is not less than two so it will stop
the execution
So the first recursive call has finished its task
So now the second recursive call will be
executed here
start is equal to p index plus one that is three
plus one which is equal to four and end is
equal to four
So in this sub array start and end is equal
to four
So there is only one element
So if start less than end condition will fail so
this recursive call also will not be executed now
This quick sort function has also finished its task so
control will reach the main quick sort function
And here it is also completed its execution
And finally the array is sorted out Now using the
quick sort algorithm the sorted array elements are 3
10 20 25 50
Now
Let us quickly summarise the quick sort concept
Partition logic will be executed first
After the process the partition function will return the Partition
Index P index
After that the whole array will be recursively sorted
using the two recursive calls That is one recursive
call from START index to P index minus one
That is the elements before P index and another Recursive
call from P index plus one to end that
is elements
After p index this recursive calls will be stopped
when the sub array has an invalid index or only
one element
So this is the process of quick sort
In the next video we will learn how to implement the partition function from this logic.